Mr. Cawein's vocation to poetry was irresistible. I do not know that
he even tried to resist it. I have even the idea that a little more
resistance would have been salutary for a talent which nothing could
have discouraged, and which opposition might have taught the arts of
compression and selection. Mr. Cawein suffered at first, I think, from
lack of criticism more than from lack of eulogy. From his early writings
I seem to gather an impression of a Louisville more ready to praise
what was second-rate than what was first-rate, and practically, indeed,
without any scale of appreciation whatever. This may be a mistake of
mine; at all events, Mr. Cawein has had more to gain from the passage
of years in self-criticism than in inspiring enthusiasm. The fount
was in him from the first; but it bubbled forth before he had digged a
definite channel for it. Sometimes, to this very day, he sports with
the principles of syntax, as Nature played games so long ago with
the fantastic caverns of the valley of the Green River or with the
coral-reefs of his own Ohio. He has bad rhymes, amazing in so delicate
an ear; he has awkwardness of phrase not expected in one so plunged in
contemplation of the eternal harmony of Nature. But these grow fewer and
less obtrusive as the years pass by.

The virgin timber-forests of Kentucky, the woods of honey-locust and
buckeye, of white oak and yellow poplar, with their clearings full of
flowers unknown to us by sight or name, from which in the distance are
visible the domes of the far-away Cumberland Mountains,--this seems to
be the hunting-field of Mr. Cawein's imagination. Here all, it must be
confessed, has hitherto been unfamiliar to the Muses. If Persephone
"of our Cumnor cowslips never heard," how much less can her attention
have been arrested by clusters of orchids from the Ocklawaha, or by the
song of the whippoorwill, rung out when "the west was hot geranium-red"
under the boughs of a black-jack on the slopes of Mount Kinnex. "Not
here," one is inclined to exclaim, "not here, O Apollo, are haunts meet
for thee," but the art of the poet is displayed by his skill in breaking
down these prejudices of time and place. Mr. Cawein reconciles us to
his strange landscape--the strangeness of which one has to admit is
mainly one of nomenclature,--by the exercise of a delightful instinctive
pantheism. He brings the ancient gods to Kentucky, and it is marvelous
how quickly they learn to be at home there. Here is Bacchus, with a spicy
fragment of calamus-root in his hand, trampling the blue-eyed grass, and
skipping, with the air of a hunter born, into the hickory thicket, to
escape Artemis, whose robes, as she passes swiftly with her dogs through
the woods, startle the humming-birds, silence the green tree-frogs, and
fill the hot still air with the perfumes of peppermint and pennyroyal.
It is a queer landscape, but one of new natural beauties frankly and
sympathetically discovered, and it forms a _mise en scene_ which, I make
bold to say, would have scandalized neither Keats nor Spenser.
