Since the disappearance of the latest survivors of that graceful and
somewhat academic school of poets who ruled American literature so long
from the shores of Massachusetts, serious poetry in the United States
seems to have been passing through a crisis of languor. Perhaps there is
no country on the civilized globe where, in theory, verse is treated with
more respect and, in practice, with greater lack of grave consideration
than in America. No conjecture as to the reason of this must be attempted
here, further than to suggest that the extreme value set upon sharpness,
ingenuity and rapid mobility is obviously calculated to depreciate and
to condemn the quiet practice of the most meditative of the arts. Hence
we find that it is what is called "humorous" verse which is mainly in
fashion on the western side of the Atlantic. Those rhymes are most warmly
welcomed which play the most preposterous tricks with language, which
dazzle by the most mountebank swiftness of turn, and which depend most
for their effect upon paradox and the negation of sober thought. It
is probable that the diseased craving for what is "smart," "snappy,"
and wide-awake, and the impulse to see everything foreshortened and
topsy-turvy, must wear themselves out before cooler and more graceful
tastes again prevail in imaginative literature.

Whatever be the cause, it is certain that this is not a moment when
serious poetry, of any species, is flourishing in the United States. The
absence of anything like a common impulse among young writers, of any
definite and intelligible, if excessive, _parti pris_, is immediately
observable if we contrast the American, for instance, with the French
poets of the last fifteen years. Where there is no school and no clear
trend of executive ambition, the solitary artist, whose talent forces
itself up into the light and air, suffers unusual difficulties, and
runs a constant danger of being choked in the aimless mediocrity that
surrounds him. We occasionally meet with a poet in the history of
literature, of whom we are inclined to say: "Charming as he is, he would
have developed his talent more evenly and conspicuously, if he had been
accompanied from the first by other young men like-minded, who would
have formed for him an atmosphere and cleared for him a space." This is
the one regret I feel in contemplating, as I have done for years past,
the ardent and beautiful talent of Mr. Madison Cawein. I deplore the
fact that he seems to stand alone in his generation; I think his poetry
would have been even better than it is, and its qualities would certainly
have been more clearly perceived, and more intelligently appreciated, if
he were less isolated. In his own country, at this particular moment,
in this matter of serious nature-painting in lyric verse, Mr. Cawein
possesses what Cowley would have called "a monopoly of wit." In one of
